MAKING the case that Apple’s gizmos are not “cutting-edge” is a way to goad devotees into an online tirade about the quality of the iPhone’s camera or the slimness of MacBooks. Such debates can usually be ignored by non-geeks. But not in India: a ministerial decision deeming that the tech giant’s products are not “cutting-edge” has, in effect, kiboshed plans to open stores there. It is a second reversal for Apple in a country it says is important to its prospects.

Apple’s application to sell its gadgets through its own stores was rejected because the devices in question are made outside India. Foreign-investment approval is guaranteed only if 30% of a shop’s goods are sourced domestically. The tech firm unexpectedly failed to qualify for an exemption for products that are “state of the art”. Where Apple stumbled is not clear, given the raft of agencies and officials who need to chime in before the finance minister signs off on each new investment proposal.   

Arun Jaitley, the current finance minister, backed the decision on the ground that the government of India was concerned with job creation. Perhaps sensing such an argument might crop up, Tim Cook, Apple’s boss, visited India for the first time in May to unveil a development facility creating up to 4,000 jobs. Many thought this investment—to say nothing of a visit to Narendra Modi, the prime minister, and Mr Cook’s attendance at a cricket match—would clinch it for Apple.

Quite the contrary. Another one of Apple’s plans was to sell refurbished second-hand iPhones in the country, possibly the only way to square high prices with Indian consumers’ thin wallets. But after furious lobbying by Apple’s rivals, that too has been rejected by ministers on environmental grounds—despite the firm promising to do the refurbishment in India.

These setbacks (which may yet prove temporary) are an annoyance for Mr Cook. A regulatory filing suggested Apple crossed the $1 billion sales mark in India for the first time last year, albeit out of $234 billion worldwide. He has recently contrasted the firm’s 56% rise in iPhone sales in India with slipping shipments globally. That has much to do with Apple’s tiny share of the smartphone market in India—around 2%, analysts reckon—and saturation elsewhere.

India’s smartphone market is growing at 30% a year, according to Strategy Analytics, a research firm, as growth rates in other big markets such as China and America now languish in single figures. Even if it gets its way with the government, Apple may not benefit that much. Whereas in India the latest iPhone sells for over 50,000 rupees ($740), the most popular smartphones are handsets from Indian or Chinese brands costing just 1,000 rupees. Try finding anything much for that price in an Apple store.


